I think a lot of people really are drawn to that enigmatic smile, since it's such a unique expression, even today.

That being said, portraits have historically served several purposes, and the Mona Lisa never really fully fit into any of them.  Because it's not a clearly defined, easily explainable work of art, people keep coming back to it.  We want answers, and simply put, it bugs us that we don't have them, so we keep looking for them.  

There are a bazillion theories out there, and they all make a little sense, but few actually stand alone as a clear, definitive explanation.  

The one that makes the most sense* to me is that this was simply a wedding portrait.  Many couples had portraits commissioned to cement their marriage, but due to high mortality rates, the portraits were painted separately, then placed together, so that if one partner died, a portrait of the new spouse could easily be put in its stead.  She's actually wearing a very faint veil on her head, which was a sign that she was pregnant, and again, with the high mortality rate, the likelihood that she might die in childbirth was fairly strong, and her husband might wanted to have had the portrait painted while he could.

Having said that, da Vinci only painted 15 works in his lifetime, and they were usually full of symbolism, so the idea that this is simply a portrait doesn't quite sit well with me.  Which is why I come back to it over and over, thus proving my point.

*  I don't necessarily fully agree with this, but it makes the most sense against the others, including that this is a self-portrait in drag, or at least an interpretation of his feminine side, or the smile is a reference to her supposed surname, Jocundo (related to the word for "smile"), among others.

The short answer is explained here on PBS: http://www.npr.org/2011/07/30/13...

Here is the Times' article on the heist: http://www.time.com/time/arts/ar...

Have you ever pondered as to why Alec Baldwin never become a superstar in Hollywood? Or why he has failed to reach James Dean or Marlon Brando legendary status? Back in the 1980s Hollywood executives were placing their hopes on the shoulder of the young Alec. The actor was a stud with acting talent. Executive producers invested a lot of money trying to promote him as a leading star rival Tom Cruise. Well, the public never did get the memo nor buy into Alec's mystique. It is a shame because Alec is a terrific actor. He gave a legendary performance in Glengarry Glen Ross. He could have been a legend but it was not meant to be...

Fate is kinder to Mona Lisa. The background history of Mona Lisa is rather obvious to scholars; I agree with Samantha's general points but do believe she misses a major fact (explain later). Leonardo developed a new style of portrait painting: the three quarter pose, sfumato technique, imaginary landscape. And yes, the mysterious smile. This is the legend of the Mona Lisa. We are not sure as to what or why she smiles? That mystery lingers to these days.

Mona Lisa is a great painting. Before 1911, the painting was famous like many other masterpieces, though it was much less well-known. However, the event that elevated Mona Lisa into a rock star status involved two historic figures: Pablo Picasso (painter) and Apollinaire (poet, leader of Picasso's group). Thank to Picasso, he unwittingly fueled the Mona Lisa's legend. As a prank, the pair of artists stolen the painting and several other works from the Louvre in 1911. Then the hunt was on. The media got involved and wild fire spread. Rumors were circulated that the polices would soon search Picasso's apartment. In panic, Apollinaire and Picasso tried to return the missing artworks. They took a long walk to the Lourve. Their attempt failed. In their defeat, they headed home. The next morning, Picasso brought the evidences to the Paris-Journal. As a result, Apollinaire was arrested and jailed. In the end, both men were brought to trial. Apollinaire confessed everything, whereas Picasso lied like a weasel and denied he ever knew Apollinaire. 

While the incident ended rather tragic for Apollinaire and Picasso. They  friendship ended. However, it was a win-win situation for the Lourve. Their famous painting got headlines all around the world for weeks. From there, the legend grew...and grew. Then Nat King Cole recored the song in honor of Mona Lisa.


Update: On July 30, 2011, NPR did a story on Mona Lisa. It confirms the theft theory. Apollinaire and Picasso did buy stolen paintings. However, the thieves that stolen the Mona Lisa were Vincenzo, Michele Lancelotti, and Vincenzo Perugia, the Italian group. But it was the theft angle that made the Mona Lisa infamous. See the links above.



According to records, Leonardo traveled with the Mona Lisa wherever he went. Why would he carry this painting everywhere?  What was he hiding?   As others answers have stated there are many theories as to what it all means.  But no one really knows.  
 
I feel the he was commissioned by Francesco del Giocondo to make the painting of his wife (or a self portrait if you want to argue the point)  ;).  The smile of the woman is the most intriguing part of the work.  Numbers and symbols were embedded in his artwork due to the scrutiny of the Catholic church. 
 
If you examine the Mona Lisa you can find the number 2 in the left eye and a number 7 in the right eye.  Also in the upper right side under the arched bridge you can find the number 72.  Seventy two was a number he held to represent the end of the world (the apocalypse).  In his other great work "The Last Supper" there are 72 tiles in the ceiling.  He created his own geometric structure that had 72 sides.  The vitruvian man has 72 degrees and 27 degrees.  Leonardo was a visionary but not necessarily a prophet.  All of his inventions were failures of his time but later became working after others improved on his works.  Many of his drawings were gathered in The Codex Alanticus (a book that is actually a box).  He studied nature to try to unlock natures secrets, and he appeals to the logical thinker.  That is why his work is so famous.


It was also unusual that da Vinci took this particular painting with him when he left Italy for France as an old man.  He would have painted the Mona Lisa on a commission from someone, and in theory, should have turned over the painting when it was completed.  Apparently he claimed that he "never finished" this particular one (not that he was ever satisfied with any of his work), and used that as an excuse to not turn it over to whomever it was that had hired him to paint it.

The stories I've read say that the King of France bought the painting from Leonardo when he arrived in France, with the condition that Leonardo got to keep it until his death.  So the French King eventually took possession of the painting!  

So, it gets lots of intrigue even before it is stolen in 1911, because of its unusual (and much unknown) background.  

It's not a particularly large painting for such a large reputation!  When I saw it a number of years ago, I was surprised at how small it is!

====================================
According to art historian Jack Greenstein, the original name of Leonardo's masterpiece is not the Mona Lisa or La Gioconda, but La Joconda with a "J."  Greenstein makes this conclusion, based on an inventory of the estate of one of Leonardo's pupils, which refers to the famous artwork as "the painting called La Joconda."  If you translated this original title into English, the resulting translation would be something like The Mirthful Lady or The Cheerful Lady.  

After this point, things get complicated, because of the book Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects by the 16th century painter Giorgio Vasari.  In this book, Vasari not only wrote some of the best contemporary accounts of the greatest Italian Renaissance painters that still survive into the 21st century, but he also basically invented the modern scholarly discipline of art history in the process.  In other words, what Vasari wrote about Leonardo da Vinci carries a lot of weight, and deservedly so, even though Vasari wasn't necessarily 100% accurate on every single detail.  

According to Vasari, "Leonardo undertook to execute, for Francesco del Giocondo, the portrait of Monna Lisa, his wife; and after toiling over it for four years, he left it unfinished; and the work is now in the collection of King Francis of France, at Fontainebleau."  Vasari's account supports the basic idea that Leonardo da Vinci painted a portrait called Mona Lisa, but Vasari never refers to this portrait of Mona Lisa as La Gioconda or La Joconda.  

Vasari assumed that Mona Lisa was a depiction of the wife of Francesco del Giocondo, but nobody ever assumed that Mona Lisa and La Gioconda were the same painting until the 17th century.  The confusion starts in 1642 when a French critic named Pere Dan identified Leonardo's most famous painting as:

the portrait of a virtuous Italian lady, and not a courtesan (as some believe), named Mona Lisa, commonly called Gioconda, who was the wife of a Ferrarese Nobleman called François Iocondo, an intimate friend of the said Leonardo who had asked his permission to make a portrait of his wife.

The problem with Pere Dan's account is that it gets almost every detail wrong about Francesco del Giocondo. Francesco Gioconda was not from Ferrara but Florence.  He was not a nobleman, but rather a silk merchant who later became a minor elected official.  Finally, there is no evidence that corroborates that Francesco del Giocondo was ever a friend of Leonardo da Vinci, let alone an "intimate" friend.  On the contrary, all the evidence about all the other portraits Leonardo da Vinci did suggests that he only accepted commissions for portraits from patrons who had more wealth or social rank than Mr. & Mrs. del Giocondo.

Vasari's account of the the making of the Mona Lisa is similarly problematic.  There is no conclusive proof that Vasari ever talked to the female model who sat for La Gioconda, whether that model was Lisa del Giocondo or not.  Nor is there any proof that that Vasari ever spoke to whoever commissioned La Gioconda.  Finally, Vasari's description of the Mona Lisa/La Gioconda includes several errors, including a reference to the artwork as unfinished.  Vasari did the best with the materials he had, but it is definitely possible that Vasari had never actually seen any painting called Mona Lisa/La Gioconda, but instead he had to construct a description of the painting based on hearsay he gathered from other people who had seen it.  

Based on this evidence, Jack Greenstein concludes that the title La Gioconda is not a reference to the feminine form of Lisa del Giocondo's last name, but merely a variant spelling of the painting "La Joconda" inventoried in the estate of Leonardo da Vinci's pupil.  If Greenstein is correct, then La Gioconda does not refer to any specific person in particular, but simply refers to a portrait of a generic smiling woman.

So what makes the smile in that painting so mysterious?  In a 2010 article in the journal Psychological Science, three neuropsychologists tried to figure out why by doing computer simulations of facial expressions that approximate the so-called Mona Lisa smile.  Part of the answer has to do with sfumato, a Renaissance painting technique (derived from the Italian word for "smoky") that   avoids harsh, linear outlines and allows different colors and shades to blend into one another, sometimes giving a painting a slight hazy feel.  Instead of trying to capture a smile by using linear perspective to create an anatomically correct two-dimensional depiction of a woman's mouth, Leonardo focuses on using sfumato to seduce us into detecting subtle changes in light on each lip.  As these changes in light catch the corner of the eye, we perceive the woman in the portrait as smiling.  On the other hand, when we look at the woman's mouth more directly, those changes of light become less visible to us and, suddenly, the smile looks more like a smirk.  

As the neuroscientists concluded, 

the subtle smile one perceives while looking at Mona Lisa’s eyes (when her mouth appears blurred) vanishes when one attempts to verify this impression by looking at the mouth with maximum visual acuity. Hence, the proposed basis for the elusive quality of Mona Lisa’s smile is that “you can’t catch her smile by looking at her mouth. She smiles until you look at her mouth”

I'm not saying Leonardo would have understood 21st century neuroscience (although he was a genius), but like many great visual artists, he probably had a deep intuitive understanding about how he could use his talents to manipulate a viewer's perception.  The smile is mysterious, because da Vinci worked excruciatingly hard to make it that way.  

When you refer to the painting with a title like La Gioconda or The Mirthful Lady, it becomes clearer that the smile was the whole point of the painting.  The painting is a stylistic showcase for a smile.  Yes, da Vinci had to work painstakingly to create the landscape in the background, the haze in the air, the  folds in the woman's sleeve, the woman's supple alabaster hands, but it was all dedicated to showing off that smile.

===============

Well, just look at it! To me, it looks like she's in on some joke or secret that the viewer has missed out on, and that's just how Leonardo painted her. Plus, the Mona Lisa is a huge departure from conventional female portraiture of its time, when you would almost never see a woman crack much of a smile in her portrait, so it's natural for us to ask WHY IS SHE DOING THAT? WHAT DOES SHE KNOW THAT I DON'T? But hey, there's more to Mona than her smile, and you can read more about her here.


Monalisa is a legendary portrait of a lady who was the wife of fabric merchant.
her smile in this portrait holds real secrets that has yet not been revealed but researchers strongly believe that to make her smile like this definitely holds some facts about her time.They believe that Leanardo da' vinci used to hide his secrets in all his paintings and even in some of his manuscripts by writing in this way that you can only read it if you look the entire writing in a mirror. One of the researchers also tried to apply this fact on one of his paintings and came out with an astonishing result. He created a mirror image of the painting of Monalisa and joined the two mirror image paintings, also revealing the fact that da vinci knowingly made the painting with some horizontal and vertical axes that may apply in joining the painting. After he joined them, he found to get a clear image of an alien. it was the same alien in his other paintings also. they kept joining the paintings and found a large variable faces of aliens. Da vinci had already mentioned these aliens in his previous paintings and the most amazing thing was the faces matched exactly.Researchers strongly believe that Da vinci had direct contact with the aliens who provided him with all the major discoveries like aviation planes, flying mechanism etc. Da vinci was the first person to make robotic tiger. But about the Monalisa painting, they still keep saying that her smile still have a lot of secrets. For more interesting facts, watch Ancient Aliens on History channel.


There's no evidence than anything is objectively beautiful. Can you think of a single thing that all people, of all cultures, find beautiful? So, no, the Mona Lisa is not objectively beautiful. Though I like it.



The Mona Lisa is an embodiment of feminine power. While she is serene there is a ferocity in her self containment. She looks out at us with such egoless satisfaction and understanding that we are left humbled in her presence. Eyes slightly lidded, arms gently folded, the Mona Lisa is at one with a force that I as a man can only wonder about. She exemplifies the power that infuses women in the early stages of pregnancy.


========
We built an extensive database using over 200 sources published over the past 150 years that indicate they list or reproduce the greatest, or most beloved, or most famous, or most beautiful, etc., paintings in the world.  Our database contains over 20,000 entries (about 15,000 unique works).  Many art historians contend that the greatest paintings have always been considered great which is of course not the case.  The Mona Lisa does not start appearing on "the greatest" lists until shortly after the painting was stolen and returned in the early 20th century.   Other paintings that occur most frequently in our database (and so could be deemed to be the greatest or the best or whatever), such as Velasquez's Las Meninas were written off as "quaint" in early sources while some of his other works which are now considered minor were thought of as great.  The inclusion of Watteau's Journey to Cythera, Constable's The Hay Wain, and Gainsborough's Blue Boy, all in the top 25 works of all time according to our study, are a complete mystery to me.  To me, telling the public that the Mona Lisa is the greatest painting ever created by mankind places the viewer in Bateson's double-bind theory of schizophrenia -- repressing what one is seeing (a rather mediocre, small, dirty portrait) and replacing that perception with what one is told he/she is seeing (the most beautiful and astonishing painting ever made).  On another note, can anyone explain why "Hey Jude" is the most incredible song ever recorded and tops all such lists?

=======================

Sigmund Freud, of all people, was an advocate of the Mona Lisa as objectively beautiful. In his little known, but really interesting biography of Da Vinci, Freud attempts a kind of historical psycho-analysis based on works such as the Mona Lisa.

For Freud the Mona Lisa is an expression of something at the edge  representation. An expression of Da Vinci's love and fear of his mother. The enigmatic smile is both seductive and consoling. Both sexual and maternal.

In as much as we all have mothers, and they are formative in our learning to be, then it can be said to express a kind of universal beauty.

I'm not saying that I necessarily agree that that is with why people crowd to the Louvre, but Freud's argument is an interesting one.

=======================
1
 
Fred Landis, Investigative Reporter 
The Mona Lisa is the definition of a kind of beauty.Female beauty minus the lust.
"The Dispassionate Pleasure of Beauty,The Critique of Judgement", Immanuel Kant "This definition of Beauty can be derived from the preceding definition of it as an object of pleasure apart from interest."
Contrary to speculation,the Mona Lisa is not a self-portrait,but it does seem asexual.
If you had never heard of the Mona Lisa and there were no permanent crowds,it would still get your attention. It is enigmatic,ambiguous, undefined .It draws you in-to the mystery. It is staring straight at you and every time you look,the smile has subtly changed.


 Leonardo da Vinci and how he painted this lady with a quiet, nature background, how she is smiling a quiet smile and how her body is turned just a little bit, with her hands softly crossed
