I think a lot of people really are drawn toenigmatic smile, since it's such a unique expression, even today.

That being said, s have historically served several purposes, and the Mona Lisa never really fully fit into any of them.  Because it's not a clearly defined, easily explainable work of art, people keep coming back to it.  We want answers, and simply put, it bugs uswe don't have them, so we keep looking for them.  

There are a bazillion theories out there, and they all make a little sense, but few actually stand alone as a clear, definitive explanation.  

The onemakes the most sense* to me isthis was simply a wedding  Many couples had s commissioned to cement their marriage, but due to high mortality rates, the s were painted separately, then placed together, soif one partner died, a  of the new spouse could easily be put in its stead.  She's actually wearing a very faint veil on her head, which was a signshe was pregnant, and again, with the high mortality rate, the likelihoodshe might die in childbirth was fairly strong, and her husband might wanted to have had the  painted while he could.

Having said that, da Vinci only painted 15 works in his lifetime, and they were usually full of symbolism, so the ideathis simply a  doesn't quite sit well with me.  Which why I come back to it over and over, thus proving my point.

*  I don't necessarily fully agree with this, but it makes the most sense against the others, includingthis a self- in drag, or at least an interpretation of his feminine side, or the smile a reference to her supposed surname, Jocundo (related to the word for "smile"), among others.

The short answer explained here on PBS: http://www.npr.org/2011/07/30/13...

Here the Times' article on the heist: http://www.time.com/time/arts/ar...

Have you ever pondered as to why Alec Baldwin never become a superstar in Hollywood? Or why hefailed to reach James Dean or Marlon Brando legendary status? Back in the 1980s Hollywood executives were placing their hopes on the shoulder of the young Alec. The actor was a stud with acting talent. Executive producers invested a lot of money trying to promote him as a leading star rival Tom Cruise. Well, the public never did get the memo nor buy into Alec's mystique. It a shame because Alec a terrific actor. He gave a legendary performance in Glengarry Glen Ross. He could have been a legend but it was not meant to be...

Fate kinder to Mona Lisa. The background history of Mona Lisa rather obvious to scholars; I agree with Samantha's general points but do believe she misses a major fact (explain later). Leonardo developed a new style of  painting: the three quarter pose, sfumato technique, imaginary landscape. And yes, the mysterious smile. This the legend of the Mona Lisa. We are not sure as to what or why she smiles? That mystery lingers to these days.

Mona Lisa a great painting. Before 1911, the painting was famous like many other masterpieces, though it was much less well-known. However, the eventelevated Mona Lisa into a rock star status involved two historic figures: Pablo Picasso (painter) and Apollinaire (poet, leader of Picasso's group). Thank to Picasso, he unwittingly fueled the Mona Lisa's legend. As a prank, the pair of artists stolen the painting and several other works from the Louvre in 1911. Then the hunt was on. The media got involved and wild fire spread. Rumors were circulatedthe polices would soon search Picasso's apartment. In panic, Apollinaire and Picasso tried to return the missing artworks. They took a long walk to the Lourve. Their attempt failed. In their defeat, they headed home. The next morning, Picasso brought the evidences to the Paris-Journal. As a result, Apollinaire was arrested and jailed. In the end, both men were brought to trial. Apollinaire confessed everything, whereas Picasso lied like a weasel and denied he ever knew Apollinaire. 

While the incident ended rather tragic for Apollinaire and Picasso. They  friendship ended. However, it was a win-win situation for the Lourve. Their famous painting got headlines all around the world for weeks. From there, the legend grew...and grew. Then Nat King Cole recored the song in honor of Mona Lisa.


Update: On July 30, 2011, NPR did a story on Mona Lisa. It confirms the theft theory. Apollinaire and Picasso did buy stolen paintings. However, the thievesstolen the Mona Lisa were Vincenzo, Michele Lancelotti, and Vincenzo Perugia, the Italian group. But it was the theft anglemade the Mona Lisa infamous. See the links above.



According to records, Leonardo traveled with the Mona Lisa wherever he went. Why would he carry this painting everywhere?  What was he hiding?   As others answers have stated there are many theories as to what it all means.  But no one really knows.  
 
I feel the he was commissioned by Francesco del Giocondo to make the painting of his wife (or a self  if you want to argue the point)  ;).  The smile of the woman the most intriguing part of the work.  Numbers and symbols were embedded in his artwork due to the scrutiny of the Catholic church. 
 
If you examine the Mona Lisa you can find the number 2 in the left eye and a number 7 in the right eye.  Also in the upper right side under the arched bridge you can find the number 72.  Seventy two was a number he held to represent the end of the world (the apocalypse).  In his other great work "The Last Supper" there are 72 tiles in the ceiling.  He created his own geometric structurehad 72 sides.  The vitruvian man72 degrees and 27 degrees.  Leonardo was a visionary but not necessarily a prophet.  All of his inventions were failures of his time but later became working after others improved on his works.  Many of his drawings were gathered in The Codex Alanticus (a bookis actually a box).  He studied nature to try to unlock natures secrets, and he appeals to the logical thinker.  That why his work so famous.


It was also unusualda Vinci took this particular painting with him when he left Italy for France as an old man.  He would have painted the Mona Lisa on a commission from someone, and in theory, should have turned over the painting when it was completed.  Apparently he claimedhe "never finished" this particular one (nothe was ever satisfied with any of his work), and usedas an excuse to not turn it over to whomever it washad hired him to paint it.

The stories I've read saythe King of France bought the painting from Leonardo when he arrived in France, with the conditionLeonardo got to keep it until his death.  So the French King eventually took possession of the painting!  

So, it gets lots of intrigue even before it stolen in 1911, because of its unusual (and much unknown) background.  

It's not a particularly large painting for such a large reputation!  When I saw it a number of years ago, I was surprised at how small it is!

====================================
According to art historian Jack Greenstein, the original name of Leonardo's masterpiece not the Mona Lisa or La Gioconda, but La Joconda with a "J."  Greenstein makes this conclusion, based on an inventory of the estate of one of Leonardo's pupils, which refers to the famous artwork as "the painting called La Joconda."  If you translated this original title into English, the resulting translation would be something like The Mirthful Lady or The Cheerful Lady.  

After this point, things get complicated, because of the book Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects by the 16th century painter Giorgio Vasari.  In this book, Vasari not only wrote some of the best contemporary accounts of the greatest Italian Renaissance paintersstill survive into the 21st century, but he also basically invented the modern scholarly discipline of art history in the process.  In other words, what Vasari wrote about Leonardo da Vinci carries a lot of weight, and deservedly so, even though Vasari wasn't necessarily 100% accurate on every single detail.  

According to Vasari, "Leonardo undertook to execute, for Francesco del Giocondo, the  of Monna Lisa, his wife; and after toiling over it for four years, he left it unfinished; and the work now in the collection of King Francis of France, at Fontainebleau."  Vasari's account supports the basic ideaLeonardo da Vinci painted a  called Mona Lisa, but Vasari never refers to this  of Mona Lisa as La Gioconda or La Joconda.  

Vasari assumedMona Lisa was a depiction of the wife of Francesco del Giocondo, but nobody ever assumedMona Lisa and La Gioconda were the same painting until the 17th century.  The confusion starts in 1642 when a French critic named Pere Dan identified Leonardo's most famous painting as:

the  of a virtuous Italian lady, and not a courtesan (as some believe), named Mona Lisa, commonly called Gioconda, who was the wife of a Ferrarese Nobleman called François Iocondo, an intimate friend of the said Leonardo who had asked his permission to make a  of his wife.

The problem with Pere Dan's account isit gets almost every detail wrong about Francesco del Giocondo. Francesco Gioconda was not from Ferrara but Florence.  He was not a nobleman, but rather a silk merchant who later became a minor elected official.  Finally, there no evidencecorroboratesFrancesco del Giocondo was ever a friend of Leonardo da Vinci, let alone an "intimate" friend.  On the contrary, all the evidence about all the other s Leonardo da Vinci did suggestshe only accepted commissions for s from patrons who had more wealth or social rank than Mr. & Mrs. del Giocondo.

Vasari's account of the the making of the Mona Lisa similarly problematic.  There no conclusive proofVasari ever talked to the female model who sat for La Gioconda, whethermodel was Lisa del Giocondo or not.  Nor there any proofthat Vasari ever spoke to whoever commissioned La Gioconda.  Finally, Vasari's description of the Mona Lisa/La Gioconda includes several errors, including a reference to the artwork as unfinished.  Vasari did the best with the materials he had, but it definitely possibleVasari had never actually seen any painting called Mona Lisa/La Gioconda, but instead he had to construct a description of the painting based on hearsay he gathered from other people who had seen it.  

Based on this evidence, Jack Greenstein concludesthe title La Gioconda not a reference to the feminine form of Lisa del Giocondo's last name, but merely a variant spelling of the painting "La Joconda" inventoried in the estate of Leonardo da Vinci's pupil.  If Greenstein correct, then La Gioconda does not refer to any specific person in particular, but simply refers to a  of a generic smiling woman.

So what makes the smile inpainting so mysterious?  In a 2010 article in the journal Psychological Science, three neuropsychologists tried to figure out why by doing computer simulations of facial expressionsapproximate the so-called Mona Lisa smile.  Part of the answerto do with sfumato, a Renaissance painting technique (derived from the Italian word for "smoky")  avoids harsh, linear outlines and allows different colors and shades to blend into one another, sometimes giving a painting a slight hazy feel.  Instead of trying to capture a smile by using linear perspective to create an anatomically correct two-dimensional depiction of a woman's mouth, Leonardo focuses on using sfumato to seduce us into detecting subtle changes in light on each lip.  As these changes in light catch the corner of the eye, we perceive the woman in the  as smiling.  On the other hand, when we look at the woman's mouth more directly, those changes of light become less visible to us and, suddenly, the smile looks more like a smirk.  

As the neuroscientists concluded, 

the subtle smile one perceives while looking at Mona Lisa’s eyes (when her mouth appears blurred) vanishes when one attempts to verify this impression by looking at the mouth with maximum visual acuity. Hence, the proposed basis for the elusive quality of Mona Lisa’s smile is“you can’t catch her smile by looking at her mouth. She smiles until you look at her mouth”

I'm not saying Leonardo would have understood 21st century neuroscience (although he was a genius), but like many great visual artists, he probably had a deep intuitive understanding about how he could use his talents to manipulate a viewer's perception.  The smile mysterious, because da Vinci worked excruciatingly hard to make itway.  

When you refer to the painting with a title like La Gioconda or The Mirthful Lady, it becomes clearerthe smile was the whole point of the painting.  The painting a stylistic showcase for a smile.  Yes, da Vinci had to work painstakingly to create the landscape in the background, the haze in the air, the  folds in the woman's sleeve, the woman's supple alabaster hands, but it was all dedicated to showing offsmile.

===============

Well, just look at it! To me, it looks like she's in on some joke or secretthe viewermissed out on, and that's just how Leonardo painted her. Plus, the Mona Lisa a huge departure from conventional female ure of its time, when you would almost never see a woman crack much of a smile in herso it's natural for us to ask WHY IS SHE DOING THAT? WHAT DOES SHE KNOW THAT I DON'T? But hey, there's more to Mona than her smile, and you can read more about her here.


Monalisa a legendary  of a lady who was the wife of fabric merchant.
her smile in this  holds real secrets thatyet not been revealed but researchers strongly believeto make her smile like this definitely holds some facts about her time.They believeLeanardo da' vinci used to hide his secrets in all his paintings and even in some of his manuscripts by writing in this wayyou can only read it if you look the entire writing in a mirror. One of the researchers also tried to apply this fact on one of his paintings and came out with an astonishing result. He created a mirror image of the painting of Monalisa and joined the two mirror image paintings, also revealing the factda vinci knowingly made the painting with some horizontal and vertical axesmay apply in joining the painting. After he joined them, he found to get a clear image of an alien. it was the same alien in his other paintings also. they kept joining the paintings and found a large variable faces of aliens. Da vinci had already mentioned these aliens in his previous paintings and the most amazing thing was the faces matched exactly.Researchers strongly believeDa vinci had direct contact with the aliens who provided him with all the major discoveries like aviation planes, flying mechanism etc. Da vinci was the first person to make robotic tiger. But about the Monalisa painting, they still keep sayingher smile still have a lot of secrets. For more interesting facts, watch Ancient Aliens on History channel.


There's no evidence than anything objectively beautiful. Can you think of a single thingall people, of all cultures, find beautiful? So, no, the Mona Lisa not objectively beautiful. Though I like it.



The Mona Lisa an embodiment of feminine power. While she serene there a ferocity in her self containment. She looks out at us with such egoless satisfaction and understandingwe are left humbled in her presence. Eyes slightly lidded, arms gently folded, the Mona Lisa at one with a forceI as a man can only wonder about. She exemplifies the powerinfuses women in the early stages of pregnancy.


========
We built an extensive database using over 200 sources published over the past 150 yearsindicate they list or reproduce the greatest, or most beloved, or most famous, or most beautiful, etc., paintings in the world.  Our database contains over 20,000 entries (about 15,000 unique works).  Many art historians contendthe greatest paintings have always been considered great which of course not the case.  The Mona Lisa does not start appearing on "the greatest" lists until shortly after the painting was stolen and returned in the early 20th century.   Other paintingsoccur most frequently in our database (and so could be deemed to be the greatest or the best or whatever), such as Velasquez's Las Meninas were written off as "quaint" in early sources while some of his other works which are now considered minor were thought of as great.  The inclusion of Watteau's Journey to Cythera, Constable's The Hay Wain, and Gainsborough's Blue Boy, all in the top 25 works of all time according to our study, are a complete mystery to me.  To me, telling the publicthe Mona Lisa the greatest painting ever created by mankind places the viewer in Bateson's double-bind theory of schizophrenia -- repressing what one seeing (a rather mediocre, small, dirty ) and replacingperception with what one told he/she seeing (the most beautiful and astonishing painting ever made).  On another note, can anyone explain why "Hey Jude" the most incredible song ever recorded and tops all such lists?

=======================

Sigmund Freud, of all people, was an advocate of the Mona Lisa as objectively beautiful. In his little known, but really interesting biography of Da Vinci, Freud attempts a kind of historical psycho-analysis based on works such as the Mona Lisa.

For Freud the Mona Lisa an expression of something at the edge  representation. An expression of Da Vinci's love and fear of his mother. The enigmatic smile both seductive and consoling. Both sexual and maternal.

In as much as we all have mothers, and they are formative in our learning to be, then it can be said to express a kind of universal beauty.

I'm not sayingI necessarily agreethat with why people crowd to the Louvre, but Freud's argument an interesting one.

=======================
1
 
Fred Landis, Investigative Reporter 
The Mona Lisa the definition of a kind of beauty.Female beauty minus the lust.
"The Dispassionate Pleasure of Beauty,The Critique of Judgement", Immanuel Kant "This definition of Beauty can be derived from the preceding definition of it as an object of pleasure apart from interest."
Contrary to speculation,the Mona Lisa not a self-,but it does seem asexual.
If you had never heard of the Mona Lisa and there were no permanent crowds,it would still get your attention. It enigmatic,ambiguous, undefined .It draws you in-to the mystery. It staring straight at you and every time you look,the smilesubtly changed.


 Leonardo da Vinci and how he painted this lady with a quiet, nature background, how she smiling a quiet smile and how her body turned just a little bit, with her hands softly crossed
 =====================

 The most recognized painting in the world
The Mona Lisa was originally this type ofbut over time its meaningshifted and itbecome an icon of the Renaissance, the most recognized painting in the world. The Mona Lisa a likely a  of the wife of a Florentine merchant, and so her gaze would have been meant for her husband. For some reason however, the  was never delivered to its patron, and Leonardo kept it with him when he went to work for Francis I, the King of France. 

The Mona Lisa's mysterious smileinspired many writers, singers, and painters. Here's a passage about the Mona Lisa, written by the Victorian-era writer Walter Pater:
We all know the face and hands of the figure, set in its marble chair, incircle of fantastic rocks, as in some faint light under sea. Perhaps of all ancient pictures timechilled it least. The presencethus rose so strangely beside the waters, expressive of what in the ways of a thousand years men had come to desire. Hers the head upon which all "the ends of the world are come," and the eyelids are a little weary. It a beauty wrought out from within upon the flesh, the deposit, little cell by cell, of strange thoughts and fantastic reveries and exquisite passions. Set it for a moment beside one of those white Greek goddesses or beautiful women of antiquity, and how would they be troubled by this beauty, into which the soul with all its maladiespassed! 
 Piero della Francesca, Portrait of Battista Sforza (Uffizi)Early Renaissance artist, Piero della Francesca's Portrait of Battista Sforza (c. 1465-66) typical of s during the Early Renaissance (before Leonardo); figures were often painted in strict profile, and cut off at the bust. Often the figure was posed in front of a birds-eye view of a landscape.

Hans Memling, Portrait of a Young Man at Prayer, ca. 1485-1494 (Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid)A new formula
With Leonardo'sthe face nearly frontal, the shoulders are turned three-quarters toward the viewer, and the hands are included in the image. Leonardo uses his characteristic sfumato—a smokey haziness, to soften outlines and create an atmospheric effect around the figure. When a figure in profile, we have no real sense of who she is, and there no sense of engagement. With the face turned toward us, however, we get a sense of the personality of the sitter.

The infrared images also revealed da Vinci's preparatory drawingslie behind layers of varnish and paint, showingthe Renaissance man was also human.

"If you look at the left hand you see the first position of the finger, and he changed his mind for another position," Cotte said. "Even Leonardo da Vinci had hesitation."

Other revelations include:

Lace on Mona Lisa's dress
The transparency of the veil shows da Vinci first painted a landscape and then used transparency techniques to paint the veil atop it.
A change in the position of the left index and middle finger.
The elbow was repaired from damage due to a rock thrown at the painting in 1956.
The blanket covering Mona Lisa's knees also covers her stomach.
The left finger was not completely finished.
A blotch mark on the corner of the eye and chin are varnish accidents, countering claimsMona Lisa was sick.
And the Mona Lisa was painted on uncut poplar board, contrary to speculations.
In the larger picture, Cotte said when he stands back and looks up at the enlarged infrared image of Mona Lisa, her beauty and mystique are apparent.

"If you are in front of this huge enlargement of Mona Lisa, you understand instantly why Mona Lisa so famous," Cotte said. He added, it's something you have to see with your own eyes.

Very large. The kids in my classroom think she a little scary since she so much larger than my prior picture.

This a beautiful poster of exquisite classic art! VERY affordable and perfect for my use, which in a classroom.

Great product.... Came quick, and looks real cool in my classroom. I recommend to everybody to try this item. You should buy this.

This item was shipped nicely and in great condition. Exactly what we needed for school project. If you are looking for a good quality poster or print, this works out well and much less expensive than the 'big box' art supply stores.

"The actual poster dimensions appeared bigger than I'd imagined but it's still awesome just the way it is. The picture looked just as described, with superb quality, and the packaging was neat."

I purchased this to use as a prop for a play...it needed to be big to be seen from the audience. It was a good quality poster and looked great on stage. Shipped fast and they instructed me how to open it without damaging it...which I appreciate.

I receive this poster a couple months ago, and I was please with the results of how it looked. It was clear and quite a master piece a copy of this great image of the Mona Lisa. I had it lamanted and put on my wall in my den. Great poster

Great quality poster, wonderful size...used it to show to children, talked about Leonardo da Vinci and how he painted this lady with a quiet, nature background, how she smiling a quiet smile and how her body turned just a little bit, with her hands softly crossed. Each child drew their own Mona Lisa with cray pas and chalks then we hung them (taped up) in our art gallery. I took each child's photo in a Mona Lisa pose, which delighted them when they saw them printed the following week.

For older preschoolers...younger children can color in a black and white image downloaded from the internet...search mona lisa coloring book picture for a free download of the image.

This resonated with young children and their parents loved the photos.

This poster beautiful - excellent color quality. Seller shipped it immediately. Very pleased with transaction. Thank you.


The colors look great and the size perfect. However the material not good enough to recommend it, it's very thin and seems easy to damage (in any way).

On one hand this a great deal -- it on canvas and on a wooden frame. On the other hand, well, the colours are really off.... my Monas Lisa (I bought 3) all look as though they have a horrific sunburn. Color not as shown.

If you love art, you need a Mona Lisa to add to your collection, even if it's a simple poster print! The quality of this print great; now all I need a frame to put it up in the hallway (it's a poster, so it can't be a centerpiece).

When I put it up, however, I couldn't stop staring at it. It was mesmerizing. I'm glad I bought it; it a fantastic addition to the room.

Quality poster and seems sturdy, although we have framed it soit lasts a long time. Happy with the purchase!

This the best deal I've ever gotten on a poster. It looks amazinggreat quality. Definitely get this poster

A very high quality in the resolution...I can recommend it with closed eyes!!! I


The colors look great and the size perfect. However the material not good enough to recommend it, it's very thin and seems easy to damage (in any way).

This a large poster of Da Vinci's famous work. A good reproduction. I use it in my history classroom ( I am a teacher). I would recommend it.


Excellent product. It was well packaged. The package protected the integrity of the product. Very good. Is like the original picture.

I decided to buy this poster because I like the Mona Lisa alot. This poster very cool when you see it up close you can see little cracks all over it. It's like if it was the real painting of her. It's pretty big and the price it's not too bad. It came in an long circular package in good condition. When you open the package the poster will be covered with a brown paper so it won't damage the poster you can just remove it.One more thing sorry for the light on the video I had the light on.

The Mona Lisa arguably one of the most famous works of art of all time. Leonardo DaVinci created this famous piece during the Italian Renaissance. Da Vinci began working on the Mona Lisa in 1503 and it was not completed until 1506. The painting currently sits in the Lourve Museum in Paris, France.

Mona Lisaraised arguments all over the world since its creation. For many years people have contemplated and debated the identity of the sitter in the portrait. Many names were thrown around; some even believed it to be Leonardo DaVinci himself. However it now believedthe true identity of the sitter a woman named Lisa del Giocondo. Also people have argued about the messages being conveyed though Lisa’s body language. The sitters’s mouth receives a lot of attention. It hard to tell what expression her face making. Some people claimher lack of eyebrows make it impossible to read her expression.

Quite a number of the principles of art can be found in the Mona Lisa. Contrast can be seen throughout the portrait. The light colors in sky of the background of the portrait and the skin of Lisa contrast greatly with the darker colors found in Lisa’s hair, clothing, and facial features, as well as the remainder of the background. This principle used to highlight the face of Lisa.

Proportion another principle of designis used in the picture. The sitter much bigger then the objects in the background of the picture. This principle used to place an emphasis on the body of the sitter. Reading the sitters body language one of the reasonsthe portrait achieved the world-famed statusittoday.

The piece of art emphasizes the sitters face. The contrast between the section of the backgroundsurrounds the face and the sitter’s haircontrasts with the light color of the skincontrasts with the dark color of the eyes achieves the emphasis the DaVinci looking for.

Unity another principleis used in the Mona Lisa. The repetition of the colors in the background helps to create a sense of unity in the portrait. Variety also achieved in the portrait because the sitter so much larger then everyone else in the portrait.

What makes this piece so important isit caused so much controversy. It one of the most talked about works of art ever to be created in the whole world. The portrait can convey many different messages depending upon the mood or perspective of the person who views it. This an incredible piece of art because of all the thoughtit provokes. One walks away from the portrait having gained something, whereas many other portraits just catch one’s eye for a second before he or she walks away.



